---
description: Why I think decentralized technologies may never see mass adoption.
date: 1651755600
topic: "Tech"
url: against-decentralization
---

# The Case against Decentralization

For those unaware, blockchain technology has made leaps and bounds in the last decade. Hailing their freedom from the traditionally centralized world of finance, users of decentralized networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum have advocated the ideals of "Defi", or "Decentralized Finance". Other examples of decentralized and/or distributed technologies include distributed file systems such as [IPFS](https://ipfs.io/), communication protocols such as [Matrix](https://matrix.org/), and many more. Decentralization offers attractive benefits concerning privacy, censorship, and security, as well as the promise of a world in which everyone owns their data. However, the true value proposition of decentralized technologies may be outweighed by one of the most basic tenets of humanity: convenience.

Although distributed and decentralized technologies may seem like a new paradigm, the truth is that the idea is as old as the internet itself. In the late 1960s, and throughout the 70s, ARPANET, the predecessor to the modern-day internet was born. ARPANET was pretty much as decentralized as a network could be, any single computer was not essential to the network. In fact, the U.S. Department of Defense specifically funded the creation of a data network that was immune to single points of failure. The early internet into the 90s was similarly decentralized, with no true "central" servers. Even the genesis of Email was designed with decentralization in mind. So what happened? Why do we see everything going through major corporations nowadays? Google controls the world's largest search engine, and advertising network. Gmail and Outlook have taken over the Email space. Facebook, Twitter, and Reddit are giant hubs of communication. Services like AWS, Cloudflare, and GCE are the cloud providers acting as the backbone of the internet. The modern-day centralized internet is a result of convenience and security.

Let's zoom in on email. The underlying protocols that email servers run on, SMTP and IMAP, don't force centralized servers. The opposite is true: with just a little technical knowledge, anyone can host a mail server. Realistically, a tiny fraction of email users will have both the technical prerequisites, and the spare time to dedicate to setting up their own email server. For convenience, nearly all email accounts are created through third-party services such as Gmail. 

However, this raises another issue: trust. With the volume spam, phishing, and other malicious uses of email, blacklists have become a commonly used tactic to mitigate spam. Take this scenario: An enterprising individual with their ad-hoc server tries sending an email to a Gmail account. Unfortunately, Gmail has never seen messages from this server before, and historical data suggests that mail from unrecognized servers is extremely likely to be spam, so the message our user sent may have been preemptively blocked by "the big guy". While this *does* mitigate the large amount of spam flowing through the network, it creates a problem: Becoming verified as a legitimate email server can be an insurmountable challenge for those wanting to self-host email servers.

Convenience has driven the rise of massive tech companies in various sectors and has made the decentralized aspect of the internet almost completely unviable. Likewise, the same problem may exist in the future of blockchain-based technologies.

Firstly, transactions on a blockchain are final: Once a transaction is submitted, it cannot be canceled, modified, or reversed. While this is a fundamental property of all blockchains, and in many cases is an advantageous one, it also causes problems for the end-user. Humans make mistakes, and a shift from centralized to decentralized systems can cause mistakes to be irreversible. If a user sends funds to an unintended recipient, if a user is hacked, or if the user interacts with a malicious decentralized service, then there isn't any authority that can assist them in recovering their funds. A common scenario that I have seen is a user tracing hacked funds to a *centralized exchange*, and contacting the exchange to recover the funds. This wouldn't be possible with complete decentralization.

In addition, some fundamental properties of decentralized systems come at the cost of speed, efficiency, or ease of use of the network. For example, the Solana blockchain boasts low latency and high transaction throughput. However, compared to other blockchains such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, Solana is much more centralized to maintain its high performance, a tradeoff that is frequently debated. In addition, to provide resources to maintain the network, instead of a centralized company footing the bill by profiting from certain aspects of a product, decentralized networks require the user to pay a small "gas" fee for each transaction. This fee is typically small but is often cited as another inhibitor to the general adoption of decentralized systems.

To be clear, decentralized systems are often very attractive. In scenarios where a user wants full authority over their digital footprint, there is a strong case for distributed and decentralized technology. However, to truly break the consensus of the masses, a decentralized ecosystem must be attractive in enough ways to offset the numerous penalties of decentralization.

*Disclaimer: Any opinions expressed here are my own, and do not reflect those of my employer.*