---
date: 1659932784
topic: Musings
description: "How \"humanity\" on the internet is rapidly becoming a thing of the past, and what it means for the future of online interaction."
url: loss-of-humanity
---
# The Decline of Humanity on the Internet
The Internet has been centered around human interaction since its inception. From the very early email and chatrooms to the early social networks like Tumblr and Myspace, and now to the modern social media platforms: Twitter, TikTok, Facebook, Reddit, et cetera. Easy to see, however, is how the online experience has tended towards the assumption of inhumanity. Right now, the Internet is gated by captchas and email verification, and yet bots are rampant on platforms ranging from Email to Facebook and Twitter. The modern internet has become computer-first, human-second, and it shows.

## The Loss of Personality
The beginnings of the web were spearheaded by utilitarian use cases. It wasn't long before tightly-knit communities in forums, chatrooms, and other personalized spaces such as Tumblr and Myspace rose to popularity. These platforms ushered in an era of social media where the user was the primary driver of interaction. People were able to connect with communities of genuine interest and show off their "uniqueness" by creating and sharing content that was, for all intents and purposes, unique to them. As time has passed, these platforms and chatrooms have faded into obscurity. There is no doubt that these platforms still exist and do have a loyal following, but they are not growing, and for many, have become inaccessible.  

So, what happened? With greater adoption within the general populace, platforms that valued simplicity above personalization and customizability won out. Twitter, Facebook, and even newer platforms like Instagram and TikTok all championed this concept, driving the explosion in popularity of the social media space. As a consequence, platforms that catered to those willing to put in the effort to create a unique online presence have suffered. Some new platforms, such as [Substack](https://substack.com/), reintroduce some aspects reminiscent of the early pioneers of social media, and while my personal opinion is that this is a step in the right direction, it's hard to see how platforms like these will continue to grow against the likes of Twitter and Facebook.

## The Loss of Humanity
All the while, we've also become completely accustomed to the emerging bot-first network. A couple of days ago I was messaged out of the blue by an old friend. My first reaction: *"Was his account hacked?"* In this case, the answer was no, but out of the four other times I can recall a similar train of thought, three of them were, in fact, a hostile takeover of the account. On top of this, nine out of ten of the friend requests I receive on Snapchat are from bot accounts. There's no easy way to quantify the effect this has had on the average person and there isn't an easy way to solve this problem either.  

One attempt to solve these problems that I've seen is using Government Identity verification for platform onboarding. An example that comes to mind is the [South Korean Cyber Defamation Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_Korean_cyber_defamation_law). While this law intends to prevent defamation, a potentially unintended side-effect is that it also the difficulty of creating bot accounts goes from just requiring an email, to either hacking an existing account or creating a new one with a stolen identity. While this system has obvious flaws of censorship and privacy, it is still a viable solution, and for traditional social media, where identity is not kept private anyway, may not be the worst idea. This is also, in a nutshell, how KYC verification works for investment platforms as well.  

However, the real use of government systems in the previous example is to provide an incorruptible "source of truth" for humanity. Other solutions are possible but must somehow also be able to verify the humanity of a user. In truth, I haven't personally seen any viable alternatives that don't end up relying on a single centralized entity to verify the humanity of a user. One space in which this is actively being researched is, surprisingly, cryptocurrency, with [Proof of Humanity](https://www.proofofhumanity.id/) actively being researched for various applications.  

Whatever the initial use case, I believe that such a system will prevent harmful bot account interactions, and reduce spam and phishing attacks, while also providing a more human experience on the internet.